---
title: Continuous Integration
teaching: 10
exercises: 0
questions:
- "FIXME"
objectives:
- "Understand how continuous integration speeds software development"
- "Understand the benefits of continuous integration"
- "Implement a continuous integration server"
- "Identify a few options for hosting a continuous integration server"
keypoints:
- "Servers exist for automatically running your tests"
- "Running the tests can be triggered by a GitHub pull request"
- "CI allows cross platform build testing"
- "A `.travis.yml` file configures a build on the travis-ci servers"
- "Many free CI servers are available"
---

To make running the tests as easy as possible, many software development teams
implement a strategy called **continuous integration**.
As its name implies, continuous integration integrates the test suite into the
development process. Every time a change is made to the repository, the
continuous integration system builds and checks that code.

> ## Example
>
> Imagine you developed software on a MacOSX computer. Last week, you helped
> your office mate build and run it on their Linux computer. You've made some
> changes since then.
> 1. How can you be sure it will still work if they update their repository when
> they come back from vacation?
> 2. How long will that process take?
{: .callout}

The typical story in a research lab is that, well, you don't know whether it
will work on your colleagues' machine until you try rebuilding it on their
machine. If you have a build system, it might take a few minutes to update the
repository, rebuild the code, and run the tests. If you don't have a build
system, it could take all afternoon just to see if your new changes are
compatible.

> ## It saves you time!
>
> Scientists are good at creative insights, conceptual understanding, critical
> analysis, and consuming espresso. Computers are good at following instructions.
> Science would be more fun if the scientists could just give the computers the
> instructions and go grab an espresso.
>
> Continuous integration servers allow just that. Based on your instructions, a
> continuous integration server can:
>
> - check out new code from a repository
> - spin up instances of supported operating systems
> (i.e. various versions of OSX, Linux, Windows, etc.).
> - spin up those instances with different software versions
> (i.e. python 2.7 and python 3.0)
> - run the build and test scripts
> - check for errors
> - and report the results.
{: .callout}


Since the first step the server conducts is to check out the code from a
repository, we'll need to put our code online to make use of this kind of
server (unless we are able/willing to set up our own CI server).


> ## First steps...
>
> Your `mean.py` `test_mean.py` files can be the contents of a repository on
> GitHub.
>
> 1. Go to GitHub and [create a repository](https://github.com/new) called mean.
> 2. Clone that repository (git clone https://github.com:yourusername/mean)
> 3. Copy the `mean.py` and `test_mean.py` files into the repository directory.
> 4. Use git to `add`, `commit`, and `push` the two files to GitHub.
{: .callout}

## Giving Instructions

Your work on the mean function has both code and tests. Let's copy that code
into its own repository and add continuous integration to that repository.

> ## What is required
>
> It doesn't need a build system, because Python does not need to be compiled.
>
> 1. What does it need?
> 2. Write the names of the software dependencies in a file called requirements.txt
> and save the file.
> 3. In fact, why don't you go ahead and version control it?
{: .callout}

### Travis-CI

[Travis](https://travis-ci.org/) is a continous integration server
hosting platform. It's commonly used in Ruby development circles as
well as in the scientific python community.

To use Travis, all you need is an account. It's free so someone in your group
should sign up for a Travis account. Then follow the instructions on the Travis
website to connect your Travis account with GitHub.

A file called `.travis.yml` in your repository will signal to Travis that you want to
build and test this repository on Travis-CI. Such a file, for our purposes, is very simple:

~~~
language: python
python:
  - "2.6"
  - "2.7"
  - "3.2"
  - "3.3"
  - "3.4"
  - "nightly"
# command to install dependencies
install:
  - "pip install -r requirements.txt"
# command to run tests
script: py.test
~~~
{: .source}

You can see how the python package manager, pip, will use your requirements.txt file
from the previous exercise. That requirements.txt file is a conventional way to
list all of the python packages that we need. If we needed pytest, numpy, and
pymol, the requirements.txt file would look like this:

~~~
numpy
pymol
pytest
~~~
{: .source}

> ## Last steps
>
> 1. Add .travis.yml to your repository
> 2. Commit and push it.
> 3. Check the situation at [your server](https://travis-ci.org/)
{: .checklist}

## Continuous Integration Hosting

We gave the example of Travis because it's very very simple to spin up. While
it is able to run many flavors of Linux, it currently doesn't support other
platforms as well. Depending on your needs, you may consider other services
such as:

- [buildbot](http://buildbot.net/)
- [CDash](http://www.cdash.org/)
- [Jenkins](https://jenkins-ci.org/)
