_episodes/09-tdd.md, before:

---
title: Test Driven Development
teaching: 10
exercises: 0
questions:
- "How do you make testing part of the code writing process?"
objectives:
- "Learn about the benefits and drawbacks of Test Driven Development."
- "Write a test before writing the code."
keypoints:
- "Test driven development is a common software development technique"
- "By writing the tests first, the function requirements are very explicit"
- "TDD is not for everyone"
- "TDD requires vigilance for success"
---

Test-driven Development (TDD) takes the workflow of writing code and writing
tests and turns it on its head. TDD is a software development process where you
write the tests first. Before you write a single line of a function, you
first write the test for that function.

After you write a test, you are then allowed to proceed to write the function
that you are testing.  However, you are only supposed to implement enough of
the function so that the test passes. If the function does not do what is
needed, you write another test and then go back and modify the function.  You
repeat this process of test-then-implement until the function is completely
implemented for your current needs.

> ## The Big Idea
>
> This design philosophy was most strongly put forth by Kent Beck in his book
> _Test-Driven  Development: By Example_.
>
> The central claim to TDD is that at the end of the process you have an
> implementation that is well tested for your use case, and the process itself is
> more efficient. You stop when your tests pass and you do not need any more
> features. You do not spend any time implementing options and features on the off
> chance that they will prove helpful later. You get what you need when you need it,
> and no more. TDD is a very powerful idea, though it can be hard to follow religiously.
{: .callout}

The most important takeaway from test-driven development is that the moment
you start writing code, you should be considering how to test that code. The
tests should be written and presented in tandem with the implementation. **Testing
is too important to be an afterthought.**

> ## You Do You
>
> Developers who practice strict TDD will tell you that it is the best thing since
> sliced arrays. However, do what works for you. The choice whether to pursue
> classic TDD is a personal decision.
{: .callout}

The following example illustrates classic TDD for a standard deviation
function, `std()`.

To start, we write a test for computing the standard deviation from
a list of numbers as follows:

~~~
from mod import std

def test_std1():
    obs = std([0.0, 2.0])
    exp = 1.0
    assert obs == exp
~~~
{: .python}

Next, we write the _minimal_ version of `std()` that will cause `test_std1()` to
pass:

~~~
def std(vals):
    # surely this is cheating...
    return 1.0
~~~
{: .python}

As you can see, the minimal version simply returns the expected result for the
sole case that we are testing.  If we only ever want to take the standard
deviation of the numbers 0.0 and 2.0, or 1.0 and 3.0, and so on, then this
implementation will work perfectly. If we want to branch out, then we probably
need to write more robust code.  However, before we can write more code, we first
need to add another test or two:

~~~
def test_std1():
    obs = std([0.0, 2.0])
    exp = 1.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std2():
    # Test the fiducial case when we pass in an empty list.
    obs = std([])
    exp = 0.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std3():
    # Test a real case where the answer is not one.
    obs = std([0.0, 4.0])
    exp = 2.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)
~~~
{: .python}

A simple function implementation that would make these tests pass could be as follows:

~~~
def std(vals):
    # a little better
    if len(vals) == 0: # Special case the empty list.
        return 0.0
    return vals[-1] / 2.0 # By being clever, we can get away without doing real work.
~~~
{: .python}

Are we done? No. Of course not. Even though the tests all pass, this is clearly
still not a generic standard deviation function. To create a better
implementation, TDD states that we again need to expand the test suite:

~~~
def test_std1():
    obs = std([0.0, 2.0])
    exp = 1.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std2():
    obs = std([])
    exp = 0.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std3():
    obs = std([0.0, 4.0])
    exp = 2.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std4():
    # The first value is not zero.
    obs = std([1.0, 3.0])
    exp = 1.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std5():
    # Here, we have more than two values, but all of the values are the same.
    obs = std([1.0, 1.0, 1.0])
    exp = 0.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)
~~~
{: .python}

At this point, we may as well try to implement a generic standard deviation
function. Recall:

![Standard Deviation](../img/std.png)

We would spend more time trying to come up with clever
approximations to the standard deviation than we would spend actually coding it.

1. Copy the five tests above into a file called test_std.py
2. Open mod.py
3. Add an implementation that actually calculates a standard deviation.
4. Run the tests above. Did they pass?

It is important to note that we could improve this function by
writing further tests.  For example, this `std()` ignores the situation where infinity
is an element of the values list. There is always more that can be tested.  TDD
prevents you from going overboard by telling you to stop testing when you
have achieved all of your use cases.

Commit message:

Add more explanation around unit testing.

_episodes/09-tdd.md, after:

---
title: Test Driven Development
teaching: 10
exercises: 0
questions:
- "How do you make testing part of the code writing process?"
objectives:
- "Learn about the benefits and drawbacks of Test Driven Development."
- "Write a test before writing the code."
keypoints:
- "Test driven development is a common software development technique"
- "By writing the tests first, the function requirements are very explicit"
- "TDD is not for everyone"
- "TDD requires vigilance for success"
---

Test-driven Development (TDD) takes the workflow of writing code and writing
tests and turns it on its head. TDD is a software development process where you
write the tests first. Before you write a single line of a function, you
first write the test for that function.

After you write a test, you are then allowed to proceed to write the function
that you are testing.  However, you are only supposed to implement enough of
the function so that the test passes. If the function does not do what is
needed, you write another test and then go back and modify the function.  You
repeat this process of test-then-implement until the function is completely
implemented for your current needs.

> ## The Big Idea
>
> This design philosophy was most strongly put forth by Kent Beck in his book
> _Test-Driven  Development: By Example_.
>
> The central claim to TDD is that at the end of the process you have an
> implementation that is well tested for your use case, and the process itself is
> more efficient. You stop when your tests pass and you do not need any more
> features. You do not spend any time implementing options and features on the off
> chance that they will prove helpful later. You get what you need when you need it,
> and no more. TDD is a very powerful idea, though it can be hard to follow religiously.
{: .callout}

The most important takeaway from test-driven development is that the moment
you start writing code, you should be considering how to test that code. The
tests should be written and presented in tandem with the implementation. **Testing
is too important to be an afterthought.**

### Diagnostic Unit Testing

Test-driven development is a powerful tool to both prevent incipient bugs and to identify bugs as they occur.  We distinguish different aspects of the programming flaw based on their observational mode:

-   A _failure_ refers to the observably incorrect behavior of a program.  This can include segmentation faults, erroneous output, and erratic results.

-   A _fault_ refers to a discrepancy in code that results in a failure.

-   An _error_ is the mistake in human judgment or implementation that caused the fault.  Note that many errors are _latent_ or _masked_.

    -   A _latent_ error is one which will arise under conditions which have not yet been tested.

    -   A _masked_ error is one whose effect is concealed by another aspect of the program, either another error or an aggregating feature.

-   We casually refer to all of these as _bugs_.

-   An _exception_ is a manifestation of unexpected behavior which can give rise to a failure, but some languages—notably Python—use exceptions in normal processing as well.

Testing is designed to manifest _failures_ so that _faults_ and _errors_ can be identified and corrected.

So what does _unit testing_ have to do with this?  As a philosophy, test-driven development intends to specify program behavior before program composition, which means that you *immediately know* if a program is correct.  At least, that is, to the standard to which you composed your unit tests.  Good unit tests will check for both latent and manifest bugs.  Masked errors tend to be much more difficult to tease out since they can rely on interactions of components which aren't present in the testing harness.

By specifying a desired behavior before composing a software feature, test-driven development (TDD):

1.  Clarifies what we intend a feature to accomplish;
2.  Provides a reference against which an implementation can be compared.

> ## You Do You
>
> Developers who practice strict TDD will tell you that it is the best thing since
> sliced arrays. However, do what works for you. The choice whether to pursue
> classic TDD is a personal decision.
{: .callout}

The following example illustrates classic TDD for a standard deviation
function, `std()`.

To start, we write a test for computing the standard deviation from
a list of numbers as follows:

~~~
from mod import std

def test_std1():
    obs = std([0.0, 2.0])
    exp = 1.0
    assert obs == exp
~~~
{: .python}

Next, we write the _minimal_ version of `std()` that will cause `test_std1()` to
pass:

~~~
def std(vals):
    # surely this is cheating...
    return 1.0
~~~
{: .python}

As you can see, the minimal version simply returns the expected result for the
sole case that we are testing.  If we only ever want to take the standard
deviation of the numbers 0.0 and 2.0, or 1.0 and 3.0, and so on, then this
implementation will work perfectly. If we want to branch out, then we probably
need to write more robust code.  However, before we can write more code, we first
need to add another test or two:

~~~
def test_std1():
    obs = std([0.0, 2.0])
    exp = 1.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std2():
    # Test the fiducial case when we pass in an empty list.
    obs = std([])
    exp = 0.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std3():
    # Test a real case where the answer is not one.
    obs = std([0.0, 4.0])
    exp = 2.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)
~~~
{: .python}

A simple function implementation that would make these tests pass could be as follows:

~~~
def std(vals):
    # a little better
    if len(vals) == 0: # Special case the empty list.
        return 0.0
    return vals[-1] / 2.0 # By being clever, we can get away without doing real work.
~~~
{: .python}

Are we done? No. Of course not. Even though the tests all pass, this is clearly
still not a generic standard deviation function. To create a better
implementation, TDD states that we again need to expand the test suite:

~~~
def test_std1():
    obs = std([0.0, 2.0])
    exp = 1.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std2():
    obs = std([])
    exp = 0.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std3():
    obs = std([0.0, 4.0])
    exp = 2.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std4():
    # The first value is not zero.
    obs = std([1.0, 3.0])
    exp = 1.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)

def test_std5():
    # Here, we have more than two values, but all of the values are the same.
    obs = std([1.0, 1.0, 1.0])
    exp = 0.0
    assert_equal(obs, exp)
~~~
{: .python}

At this point, we may as well try to implement a generic standard deviation
function. Recall:

![Standard Deviation](../img/std.png)

We would spend more time trying to come up with clever
approximations to the standard deviation than we would spend actually coding it.

1. Copy the five tests above into a file called test_std.py
2. Open mod.py
3. Add an implementation that actually calculates a standard deviation.
4. Run the tests above. Did they pass?

It is important to note that we could improve this function by
writing further tests.  For example, this `std()` ignores the situation where infinity
is an element of the values list. There is always more that can be tested.  TDD
prevents you from going overboard by telling you to stop testing when you
have achieved all of your use cases.
